---
title: 'Polya''s ballot box'
date: 2022-08-05T10:51:46+01:00
tags: [probability,Uniform distribution, Bernoulli's distribution]
draft: false
---

We fix a pair of integers $(b,r) \in \mathbb{N}\times\mathbb{N}$.
We assume that we have an unlimited supply of white balls and
red balls and we consider a ballot box initially containing $b$ balls
white and $r$ red balls indistinguishable to the touch. We proceed to
successive draws from this ballot box, each time respecting the
following protocol:

- If the ball drawn is white, it is replaced in the ballot box
    and we add an additional white ball.

- If the ball drawn is red, it is replaced in the ballot box and
    an additional red ball is added.

The first objective of this problem is to calculate the probability of
draw a white ball during the $n$-th draw. The second objective is
to determine the distribution of the number of white balls found in
the ballot box after the $n$-th draw in a particular case.

For all $n \in \mathbb{N}$, we denote by $X_n$ the variable
equal to $1$ if the ball drawn at the $n$-th draw is white,
$0$ if the ball drawn at the $n$-th draw is red. We consider
also the sequence of real random variables
$(S_n)_{n \in \mathbb{N} }$ defined by:

$$S_0=b \text{ and } \forall n \in \mathbb{N}, S_n=b+\sum_{k=1}^n X_k.$$

We recall that if $E$ and $F$ are two events with $P(F)>0$, we
defines the conditional probability of $E$ knowing $F$ (denoted $P(E|F)$
or $P_F(E)$) by: $$P(E|F)=P_F(E) = \frac{P(E\cap F)}{P(F)}.$$

{{% center %}} 
**Part I. Preliminaries**
{{% /center %}}



1. Determine the distribution of $X_1$.

2. Determine the conditional distribution of $X_2$ knowing the event
    $(X_1=1)$. Deduce the law of $X_2$.

3. Let $n \in \mathbb{N}$. What does the random variable $S_n$ represent
    ? What is the set of values ​​taken by the random variable
    $S_n$?

{{% center %}} 
**Part II. The distribution of $X_n$**
{{% /center %}}



In this part, we consider an integer $n \in \mathbb{N}$.

1. For all $k \in \llbracket b, n+b\rrbracket$, compute
    $P(X_{n+1}=1|S_n=k)$.

2. Using the total probability formula, justify that:
    $$P(X_{n+1}=1)=\frac{E(S_n)}{b+r+n}.$$

3. Show by induction that $X_n$ follows Bernoulli's distribution of
    parameter $\frac{b}{b+r}$ for all $n \in \mathbb{N}$.

{{% center %}} 
**Part III. The distribution of $S_n$ in a particular case**
{{% /center %}}



In this part only, we assume that $b=r=1$ and we consider a
integer $n \in \mathbb{N}$.

1. Express the event $(S_n=1)$ with the events $(X_k=0)$ for
    $k \in \llbracket 1, n \rrbracket$.

2. Show that $P(S_n=1)=\frac{1}{n+1}$.

We assume in the following that we also have $P(S_n=n+1)=\frac{1}{n+1}$.

3.  (a) Either $(k,\ell) \in \llbracket 1,n+2 \rrbracket \times \llbracket 1, n+1 \rrbracket$.
      Calculate the probability $P(S_{n+1}=k | S_n = \ell)$ in each of the
      following three cases:

$$(i) \ \ell \notin \\\{k-1,k\\\},\quad (ii) \ \ell = k-1, \quad (iii) \ \ell = k.$$

   (b) Show that for all $k \in \llbracket 2, n+1 \rrbracket$, we have the:
    $$P(S_{n+1}=k)=\frac{k-1}{n+2}P(S_n=k-1)+\frac{n+2-k}{n+2}P (S_n=k).$$
  (c) Show by induction that $S_n$ follows the uniform distribution on
    $\llbracket 1,n+1 \rrbracket$.
