---
title: 'Return to the origin of a random walk on $\mathbb{Z}$'
date: 2022-08-05T15:23:02+01:00
tags: [Probability, Bernoulli's distribution, Entire series,Probability generating function]
draft: false
---

In this problem, we will study the random movement of a pawn
moving in the set of integers. At step $n=0$, we
assume that the pawn is at 0. Then, if the pawn is at
step $n$ on the integer $x\in \mathbb{Z}$, then at step $n+1$, the
pawn has a one in two chance of being at $x+1$ and a one in two chance
to be at $x-1$, regardless of previous moves.\
To model this situation, we place ourselves on a probabilistic space
$(\Omega,\mathcal{A},P)$ and we consider a sequence
$(X_{k})_{ k \in \mathbb{N}} $ of real random variables
mutually independent where their distribution is given by:

$$\forall k\in \mathbb{N},\quad P(X_{k}=1)=P(X_{k}=-1)= \frac{1}{2}.$$

We also consider the sequence of real random variables
$(S_{n})_n$ 

defined by $S_{0}=0$ and:


$$\forall n\in \mathbb{N},\quad S_{n}=\sum\limits_{k=1}^{n}X_{k}.$$

The objective of this problem is to determine the distribution of the random variable $T$ defined as follows:

- if for all $n\in \mathbb{N}$, we have $S_{n}\ne0$, we set $T=+\infty$;

- otherwise, we set $T=\min\\\{n\in \mathbb{N} \mid S_{n}=0\\\}$.

The event $(T=+\infty)$ therefore occurs if and only if the set $\\\{n\in \mathbb{N} \mid S_{n}=0\\\}$ is empty.

Finally, we define  the sequences $(p_n)$ and $(q_n)$ by:

$$\forall n\in \mathbb{N}\cup\\\{0\\\}, \quad p_{n}=P(S_{n}=0)\quad \text{et}  \quad q_{n}= \begin{cases}  0& \text{if}\ n=0\cr
                                                      P(T=n)& \text{if}\ n>0. \end{cases}$$

{{% center %}} 
**Part I. Calculation of $p_{n}$**
{{% /center %}}


We fix an integer $n\in \mathbb{N}_0$.

1. What does the random variable $S_{n}$ represent?

2. Calculate $p_{0},p_{1}$ and $p_{2}$.

3. Justify that if $n$ is odd, then we have $p_{n}=0$.\
    We consider for all $k\in \mathbb{N}$ the random variable
    $Y_{k}$ defined by $Y_{k}= \frac{X_{k}+1}{2}$. It is admitted that
    $(Y_{k})_{k \in \mathbb{N}}$ is a sequence of variables
    mutually independent real random numbers.

4. Let $k\in \mathbb{N}$. Show that $Y_{k}$ follows a 
    Bernoulli's distribution with parameter $\frac{1}{2}$.

5. For $n\ge 1$, give the distribution  of $Z_{n}=Y_{1}+\cdots+Y_{n}$ and express
    $S_{n}$ as a function of $Z_{n}$.

6. Suppose $n=2m$ with $m\in \mathbb{N}$. Infer from the  previous question that $$p_{2m}= \frac{{2m\choose m}}{4^{m}}.$$


{{% center %}} 
**Part II. Probability generating function of the sequence
$(p_{n})_{n\in \mathbb{N}}$**
{{% /center %}}


We note $R_{p}$ the radius of convergence of the entire series
$\sum\limits_{n\ge 0}^{}p_{n}x^{n}$ and $f$ the sum of this entire series
over a convergence interval.

1. Show that $R_{p}\ge1$.

2. Show that for all $m\in \mathbb{N}$, we have:
    $$p_{2m}= \frac{(-1)^{m}}{m!} \prod_{k=1}^{m}\left( - \frac{1}{2}-k+1 \right).$$

3. Determine a number $\alpha\in \mathbb{R}$ such that
    $f(x)=(1-x^{2})^{\alpha}$ for all $x\in(-1,1)$.

{{% center %}} 
**Part III. Distribution of the random variable $T$**
{{% /center %}}


We note $R_{q}$ the radius of convergence of the entire series
$\sum\limits_{n\ge0}^{}q_{n}x^{n}$ and $g$ the sum of this series
integer over its convergence interval. For all $n\in \mathbb{N}$,
we also consider the function $g_{n}:\mathbb{R}\to \mathbb{R}$
defined by $g_{n}(x)=q_{n}x^{n}$ for all $x\in \mathbb{R}$.

1. Calculate $q_{1}$ and $q_{2}$.

2. Show that the series $\sum\limits_{n\ge}^{}g_{n}$ converges
    uniformly on $[-1,1]$. Deduce that $R_{q}\ge1$.\
    In the following, we accept the relation:
    $$\forall n\in \mathbb{N}^{*},\quad p_{n}=\sum\limits_{k=0}^{n}p_{k}q_{n-k}.$$

3. Using a Cauchy product and the relation admitted above,
    show that: $$\forall x\in(-1,1),\quad f(x)g(x)=f(x)-1.$$

4. Deduce that $g(x)=1-\sqrt{1-x^{2}}$ for all $x\in(-1,1)$, then
    calculate the integral series expansion of the function
    $x\mapsto 1-\sqrt{1-x^{2}}$ specifying its radius of convergence.

5. Deduce an expression of $q_{n}$ for all
    $n\in \mathbb{N}$.

6. Using III.2 and III.4, determine the value of $P(T=+\infty)$.
    Interpret the result.

7. Does the random variable $T$ have an expectation?
