---
title: "Cardinal of a finite field"
date: 2022-08-06T22:41:51+01:00
tags: [finite field, group,ring]
draft: false
---


Let $(A,+,\cdot)$ be a finite integral ring. For
$a\in A\setminus\{0_{A}\}$, we consider the map $f_a:A\to A$
defined by $f_a(x)=a\cdot x$ for all $x\in A$.

1. (a) Show that $f_a$ is bijective.

    (b) Deduce that $(A,+,\cdot)$ is a field.

2. Let $(K,+,\cdot)$ be a finite field of cardinality $q$. We denote $0_K$ and
    $1_K$ the neutral elements for the two respective binary operations. That is
    the application $\varphi:\Bbb Z\to K$ such as: $$\begin{cases}
      \varphi(0)=0_K\cr
       \varphi(n+1)=\varphi(n)+1_K,\quad \forall n\in\Bbb Z
    \end{cases}.$$

    (a) Show that for all $n\in \mathbb{Z}$,
        $\varphi(n)=n\cdot 1_{K}$.

    (b) Show that $\varphi$ is a ring morphism.

    (c) Deduce that there exists $p\in \mathbb{N}$ such that
        $\ker \varphi=p\Bbb Z$. Do we have $p=0$? $p=1$? Justify.

    (d) Show that $\operatorname{Im}\varphi$ is a subfield of $K$.

3. The congruence class of a relative integer $n$ modulo $p$ is denoted
    $\overline{n}$.\
    Let $\psi$ the application defined by
    $\psi: \Bbb Z/p\Bbb Z\to \operatorname{Im}\varphi, \overline{n}\mapsto \varphi(n)$.

    (a) Show that $\psi$ is well-defined, that is, that
        $\psi(\overline n)$ depends on the congruence class
        $\overline n$ and not of the representative $n$ of this class.

    (b) Show that $\psi$ is a ring isomorphism.

    (c) Deduce that $p$ is prime.

4. (a) Show that every nonzero element of the group $(K,+)$ has order
        $p$.

    (b) We admit the following theorem:

    >  **Cauchy's theorem:** If $p$ is a prime number which divides the cardinal of a group, then there is an element of this group  with  order  $p$.

    Using the previous theorem, show that there exists
        $\alpha\in \mathbb N^*$ such that $q=p^\alpha$.

