---
title: 'On the integrals with parameters  $\textstyle \int_{0}^{+\infty}\frac{e^{-t}\cos(tx)}{\sqrt t}{\rm d}t$ and $\textstyle \int_{0}^{+\infty}\frac{e^{-t}\sin(tx)}{\sqrt t}{\rm d}t$'
date: 2022-08-23T22:27:00+01:00
tags: [Integral, Series, Sequence, Differential equation]
draft: false
---

**Preliminary question**\
Let $a$ be a nonzero real number. Determine a primitive  of
the function which to any real $x$ associates the complex number
$\frac{1}{x+ia}$ where $i$ verifies $i^2=-1.$\
Throughout the problem, $\lambda$ is a positive real.

For any real $\alpha$ and any real $\lambda > 0,$ we define the map  $f_{\alpha,\lambda}$ on $(0,+\infty)$ by
$t \mapsto t^\alpha e^{-\lambda t}.$


1. (a) Determine the set $A$ of pairs $(\alpha,\lambda) \in \mathbb{R} \times (0,+\infty)\ \text{such that:}$
&nbsp;

	$$\lim_{t \to 0, t > 0} f_{\alpha,\lambda}(t)$$ exists.

    (b) Determine the set $B$ of pairs
        $(\alpha,\lambda) \in \mathbb{R} \times (0,+\infty)\ \text{ such that:}$
&nbsp;
	
	$$\int_0^{+\infty} f_{\alpha,\lambda}(t) {\rm d}t$$ converges.

2. Show that for all real $x$, the functions
    $t \mapsto \frac{e^{-t}\cos(tx)}{\sqrt{t}}$ and
    $t \mapsto \frac{e^{-t}\sin(tx)}{\sqrt{t}}$ are integrable on
    $(0,+\infty).$\
    We then define the two functions $U$ and $V$ on $\mathbb{R}$ by
    $U(x) = \int_0^{+\infty} \frac{e^{-t}\cos(tx)}{\sqrt{t}} {\rm d}t$
    and
    $V(x) = \int_0^{+\infty} \frac{e^{-t}\sin(tx)}{\sqrt{t}} {\rm d}t$.

3. Study the parities of the functions $U$ and $V.$

4. Using a change of variable that we will justify
    carefully, calculate $U(0)$. *This equality can be used without proof:
    $\int_0^{+\infty} e^{-u^2}{\rm d}u = \frac{\sqrt{\pi}}{2}$.*

5. For any real $x,$ we set $W(x) = U(x)+iV(x)$ where $i$ verifies
    $i^2=-1.$

    (a) Show that the function $W$ is of class $\mathcal{C}^1$ on
        $\mathbb{R}$.

    (b)  Prove that the function $W$ is a solution
        of a first-order linear differential equation $(E)$
        that we will explain and that we will not try to solve
        here. *We can use integration by parts.*

    (b) Deduce that $U$ and $V$ are of class $\mathcal{C}^\infty$
        on $\mathbb{R}$.

    (c) Prove that we have for all real $x$: $\begin{cases}
                                        U'(x) & = -\frac{V(x)+xU(x)}{2(1+x^2)}, \\
                                        V'(x) & = \frac{U(x)-xV(x)}{2(1+x^2)}.
                                    \end{cases}$

6. For any real $t,$ we denote
    $g(t) = f_{-1/2,\lambda}(t)\sin(t) = \frac{1}{\sqrt{t}}e^{-\lambda t}\sin(t) $.
    Show that $g$ is integrable over $\mathbb{R}_+$.

7. We define the real sequence $(a_n)$ for $n \in \mathbb{N}_0$ by:
&nbsp;

    $$
    a_n = (-1)^n \int_{n\pi}^{(n+1)\pi} g(t){\rm d}t.$$

    (a) Prove that for any natural number $n$,
        $a_n = \int_0^\pi \frac{e^{-\lambda(t+n\pi)}}{\sqrt{t+n\pi}}\sin(t){\rm d}t$.

    (b) Show that the sequence $(a_n)_{n \in \mathbb{N}_0}$ is
        decreasing.

    (c) Finally prove that the sequence $(a_n)_{n \in \mathbb{N}_0}$ converges
        towards a limit $\ell$ that we will determine.

8. (a) Justify that the series $\sum_{k \geq 0} (-1)^ka_k$ converges. We
        note $S$ its sum.

    (b) Show that $S > 0$.

    (c) Using the partial sum of order $N$ of the series
        $\sum_{k \geq 0} (-1)^ka_k,$ show that we have:
        $\int_0^{+\infty} g(t){\rm d}t = \sum_{k=0}^{+\infty} (-1)^ka_k$.

9. Using a change of variable, demonstrate that for all $x>0, $
    $V(x) > 0.$

10. For any real $x>0,$ we note
    $R(x) = \left[U^2(x)+V^2(x)\right]^{1/2}$ and
    $T(x) = \arctan\left(\frac{U(x)}{V(x)}\right)$.

    (a) Prove that the functions $R$ and $T$ are extendable by
        continuity on $[0,+\infty)$.

    (b) Show that the functions $R$ and $T$ are of class
        $\mathcal{C}^1$ on $\mathbb{R}_+$.

    (c) Prove that $R$ and $T$ are solutions on $\mathbb{R}_+$ of
        two first-order linear differential equations.

    (d) Solve these differential equations on $\mathbb{R}$.

    (e) Deduce an expression on $\mathbb{R}_+$ from $R$ and from $T$ to
        using common functions.

11. Give expressions for $U(x)$ and $V(x)$ for
    $x \in \mathbb{R}$.

12. Find the results obtained in the previous question by
    solving the differential equation $(E)$ obtained in question
    5.(b).

13. For any natural number $n$ and any real number $x,$ we set
    $U_n(x) = \int_0^{+\infty} \frac{e^{-t}}{\sqrt{t}} \cos^n(xt) {\rm d}t$
    and
    $V_n(x) = \int_0^{+\infty} \frac{e^{-t}}{\sqrt{t}} \sin^n(xt) {\rm d}t$.

    (a) Let $x \in \mathbb{R}.$ Determine $U_2(x)$ and $V_2(x)$ at
        using $U(x)$ and $V(x)$.

    (b) Let $x \in \mathbb{R}$. Determine
        $\lim_{n \to +\infty} U_n(x)$.
